Document tips and tricks for the Jenkins issue triage (#4847)
jenkinsci/jenkins: docs/MAINTAINERS.adoc

There is no special preconditions to do so.
Anyone is welcome to contribute.

> **Issues Triage Team Members** review the incoming incoming issues submitted in Jenkins Jira:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Issues Triage Team Members** review the incoming issues submitted in Jenkins Jira:
```

** We want to keep pull requests focused when possible (one feature / fix per pull request),
   but we can live without it if there is no need to backport changes to the stable baseline.

== Issue triage

Jenkins core and most of its components use link:https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/[Jenkins Jira] as an issue tracker.
This issue tracker is open to all Jenkins users.

> They report defects and requests for enhancements,

Author: There are 2 "and" here in different context, not sure

In addition to it, there is a default `_unsorted` component which is recommended by default for users
who do not know what is the root cause of an issue they experience.

Searching for all Jenkins core issues is not trivial, and we provide Jira filters for it.

=== How to discover untriaged issues?

* Community rating in Jenkins link:https://www.jenkins.io/changelog/[Regular (Weekly)]
  and link:https://www.jenkins.io/changelog-stable/[LTS] releases.
  Such ratings allow users to reference issues they experienced with new Jenkins core releases,
  and it helps to discover regressions in the core causing instability or unexpected plugin failures.
* link:https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/secure/Dashboard.jspa?selectPageId=20742[Jenkins core triage board] -
  Lists untriaged and recent issues in the Jenkins core and bundled components.
* link:https://issues.jenkins-ci.org/secure/Dashboard.jspa?selectPageId=20340[Core maintainers board] -
  Lists unresolved recent regressions, unresolved recent core bugs, and popular new issues.
  This dashboard can be used to discover issues that **might** be related to the recent changes in the Jenkins core.

=== HOWTO: Initial triage

> Initial issue triage follows the following objectives:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Initial issue triage has the following objectives:
```

* **Perform initial triage of an issue**.
  Issue triage team members are not expected to perform a full analysis of the issue (though they are welcome to do so!).
  The main goal is to ensure that an issue report is legitimate and that it contains enough information to be processed.
  It is fine to request additional information from submitters and/or to refer them to reporting guidelines:
** link:https://www.jenkins.io/participate/report-issue/[Guide: How to report an issue in Jenkins]
** link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/remoting#reporting-issues[Reporting Jenkins Remoting issues]
* **Verify the issue component**.
  It is essential to ensure that the `component` field references the right component (the Jenkins core, a plugin, etc.)

>   so that an issue is discoverable processed by a component maintainer.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  so that an issue is discoverable and processed by a component maintainer.
```

Author: ```suggestion
  so that an issue can be discovered and processed by a component maintainer.
```

Maybe that

  When moving an issue, assign the issue to the `automatic` assignee so that the maintainer gets notification.
  Not all components have a default assignee, and it is perfectly fine to leave the assignee empty.
* **Verify the issue type**.
  `Bug` should be used for bug reports.
  All other issue types are considered as requests for enhancements, and there is no practical difference for the Jenkins core.
* **Verify the issue metadata**: Jenkins version, environment, labels, etc.
  Such metadata is useful for further triage and issue discoverability.
  There are some labels used in Jenkins Jira dashboard and filters, e.g. `jcasc-compatibility`, `java11-compatibility`, `jep-200`, etc.
  Assigning such labels helps users and maintainers to discover issues and act on them.
  There is no list of such "common labels" recommended for use.
  Some labels can be found in similar issues or documentation linked from system log entries in the reports.
* **Move security issue** to the `SECURITY` project.
  Sometimes the issue reporters do not follow the link:https://www.jenkins.io/security/#reporting-vulnerabilities[vulnerability reporting] process and report security issues in public.

>   If you such issues, move them to the `SECURITY` project so that the security team takes care of their triage.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If you see such issues, move them to the `SECURITY` project so that the security team take care of their triage.
```

>   If you see such issues, move them to the `SECURITY` project so that the security team takes care of their triage.

Reviewer 3: Do all of the fields get migrated correctly between JENKINS and SECURITY? Sometimes when moving between projects, Jira loses some information.

Author: ```suggestion
  If you see such issues, move them to the `SECURITY` project so that the security team takes care of their triage.
  Note that the required fields are different between projects, so some manual updates might be required when moving them.
```

WDYT @slide?

Reviewer 3: LGTM

* **Label regressions and CC stakeholders** if an issue is reported as a regression with a clear root cause,
  please set a `regression` label and, if applicable, CC contributors of a change which led to the regression.
* **Resolve invalid issues and support requests**.
  Sometimes Jenkins Jira is used as a support portal.
  We do not want to encourage that.

>   Jenkins Jira is an issue tracker, and we expect reporters to investigate issues on their side to an extent that they can be followed-up by maintainers.

Reviewer 2: Alternate phrasing suggestion
```suggestion
  Jenkins Jira is an issue tracker, and we expect reporters to investigate issues on their side to an extent that they can be reviewed by maintainers.
```

  For support requests users are expected to use link:https://www.jenkins.io/mailing-lists[mailing lists],
  link:https://www.jenkins.io/chat/[chats] and other resources (e.g. Stackoverflow).
  It is fine to link users to link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/.github/blob/master/SUPPORT.md[this page]. 
* **Resolve duplicates**.
  It is often that the same issue is already reported in the Jenkins database.
  Newly reported duplicates can be just resolved with a `Duplicate` resolution, and linked to the original issue.

=== HOWTO: Triage by maintainers

Further triage focuses on confirming the issue and defining a potential resolution.
It can be performed by _Issue Triage Team Members_ if they want to dive deeper,
or they can leave it to component maintainers.

> Triage objectives:

Reviewer 2: I think you intend to have a paragraph break here
```suggestion

Triage objectives:
```

* **Confirm reported defects**. Try to reproduce the issue or analyze the codebase.

>   If the issue is legit, it is great to explicitly confirm it in a comment.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  If the issue is legitimate, it is great to explicitly confirm it in a comment.
```

  They are linked from link:https://www.jenkins.io/participate/code/[contributing guidelines].
  If you see a simple issue but do not plan to work on it,
  put a `newbie-friendly` label on it so that somebody could pick it up.

=== How to scrub issues?

In addition to the initial triage, it is a good practice to sometimes review previously reported issues so that we could minimize backlog of issues and simplify search by users.

* **Triage reopened issues**.
  Same as for newly reported issues, it is great to process reopened issues if they are not acted on by the issue assignees.
  Often such issues can be resolved with a request to report a new issue if an issue is reopened due to another issue.
* **Resolve stale untriaged issues**.
  Issue reporters may become unresponsive before their issue can be fully triaged.
  If there is a reported issue which does not contain data for reproducing the issue,
  it is fine to resolve them after a 2-week timeout with the `Incomplete` or `Cannot reproduce` resolution.
* **Resolve/update obsolete issues**.
  Sometimes issues become obsolete due to other changes in the Jenkins core (e.g. feature removal),

>   and such issues can be just closed.

Reviewer 2: Alternate phrasing suggestion
```suggestion
  and such issues can be closed.
```

  Same for detaching functionality from the Jenkins core and plugins,

>   issues can be reassigned to the new Jira component so that they do not longer appear in the core backlog.

Reviewer 2: Phrasing alternative
```suggestion
  issues can be reassigned to the new Jira component so that they are removed from the core backlog.
```

In some cases, they may also assign the issue and keep pinging.
It is fine to not answer these questions on such pings and to refer requestors to this document,
triage team members are not responsible for handling the ticket after initial triage.

Other materials which might help:

* link:https://www.jenkins.io/participate/code/[Contribute to Jenkins / Code] or 
  link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/jenkins/blob/master/CONTRIBUTING.md[Contributing to the Jenkins Core] - 
  extended version of "feel free to contribute".
* link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/.github/blob/master/SUPPORT.md[Jenkins Support Disclaimer Page] -
for those requesters who expect quick response and SLA.
* link:https://www.jenkins.io/doc/developer/plugin-governance/adopt-a-plugin/[Plugin Adoption Policy] -
for pings in not actively maintained components.
* link:https://www.jenkins.io/project/conduct/[Jenkins Code of Conduct] -
when it gets ugly.

=== Resolving vs. Closing issues

Jira workflow for the `JENKINS` project has two similar states: `Resolved` and `Closed`.
Historically the issues are rarely being **closed**, and all dashboard and Jenkins processes interpret resolved issues as closed.

> The main difference is that the _Resolved_ issues can e reopened by users while _Closed_ ones can be reopened by admins only.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The main difference is that the _Resolved_ issues can be reopened by users while _Closed_ ones can be reopened by admins only.
```

  Lists unresolved recent regressions, unresolved recent core bugs, and popular new issues.
  This dashboard can be used to discover issues that **might** be related to the recent changes in the Jenkins core.

=== HOWTO: Initial triage

Initial issue triage has the following objectives:

* **Perform initial triage of an issue**.
  Issue triage team members are not expected to perform a full analysis of the issue (though they are welcome to do so!).
  The main goal is to ensure that an issue report is legitimate and that it contains enough information to be processed.
  It is fine to request additional information from submitters and/or to refer them to reporting guidelines:
** link:https://www.jenkins.io/participate/report-issue/[Guide: How to report an issue in Jenkins]
** link:https://github.com/jenkinsci/remoting#reporting-issues[Reporting Jenkins Remoting issues]
* **Verify the issue component**.
  It is essential to ensure that the `component` field references the right component (the Jenkins core, a plugin, etc.)
  so that an issue can be discovered and processed by a component maintainer.

>   When moving an issue, assign the issue to the `automatic` assignee so that the maintainer gets notification.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  When moving an issue, assign the issue to the `automatic` assignee so that the maintainer gets a notification.
```

>   Not all components have a default assignee, and it is perfectly fine to leave the assignee empty.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  Not all components have a default assignee, and it is perfectly fine to leave the assignee field empty.
```

* **Triage reopened issues**.
  Same as for newly reported issues, it is great to process reopened issues if they are not acted on by the issue assignees.
  Often such issues can be resolved with a request to report a new issue if an issue is reopened due to another issue.
* **Resolve stale untriaged issues**.
  Issue reporters may become unresponsive before their issue can be fully triaged.
  If there is a reported issue which does not contain data for reproducing the issue,
  it is fine to resolve them after a 2-week timeout with the `Incomplete` or `Cannot reproduce` resolution.
* **Resolve/update obsolete issues**.
  Sometimes issues become obsolete due to other changes in the Jenkins core (e.g. feature removal),
  and such issues can be closed.
  Same for detaching functionality from the Jenkins core and plugins,
  issues can be reassigned to the new Jira component so that they are removed from the core backlog.

=== Triaging requests for enhancement

Requests for enhancement (RFEs) include the `New Feature` and `Improvement` types in Jenkins Jira.

> They might be more different to triage than bug reports.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
The process to triage them might be different than bug reports.
```
